[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: I
[Amit Varma]: am Amit Verma and in my weekly podcast THE SCENE AND UNSEEN, I take a shot at answering
[Amit Varma]: all these questions and many more.
[Amit Varma]: I aim to go beyond the scene and show you the unseen effects of public policy and private
[Amit Varma]: action.
[Amit Varma]: We speak to experts on economics, political philosophy, cognitive neuroscience and constitutional
[Amit Varma]: law so that their insights can blow not only my mind, but also yours.
[Amit Varma]: The Seen and the Unseen releases every Monday.
[Amit Varma]: So do check out the archives and follow the show at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: You can also subscribe to The Seen and the Unseen on whatever podcast app you happen
[Amit Varma]: to prefer.
[Amit Varma]: And now, let's move on to the show.
[Amit Varma]: One speaks of India's great demographic dividend.
[Amit Varma]: The average age in India is 27.
[Amit Varma]: 60% of this country was born after 1991, the year in which we allegedly liberalized some
[Amit Varma]: of our economy.
[Amit Varma]: Our young people should be our greatest asset.
[Amit Varma]: And yet, our young people need jobs and education, and these are just not there.
[Amit Varma]: Every month, one million people enter the workforce, and there just aren't enough jobs
[Amit Varma]: for them.
[Amit Varma]: All of these young people, entering the best years of their lives with hope and desire,
[Amit Varma]: but without opportunities.
[Amit Varma]: What are they to do?
[Amit Varma]: How do they feel about this?
[Amit Varma]: Can they be anything but angry?
[Amit Varma]: How do they cope with their anger?
[Amit Varma]: Will this so-called demographic dividend end up being a demographic disaster?
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: As a middle-aged man of great privilege, living in a big city, I sometimes feel I don't understand
[Amit Varma]: what India is all about.
[Amit Varma]: The life I live as a member of the elite is very different from the lives lived by most
[Amit Varma]: of my fellow Indians.
[Amit Varma]: And I wonder sometimes in my little cocoon whether I understand this country at all.
[Amit Varma]: So much about it is so bewildering.
[Amit Varma]: Well, my guest on today's episode is someone who has helped clear some of the fog from
[Amit Varma]: my head.
[Amit Varma]: Snigdha Poonam is a Delhi-based journalist, and her book, Dreamers, chronicles the lives
[Amit Varma]: of a handful of young Indians and gives a sense of how young people across small towns
[Amit Varma]: in North India feel about the world.
[Amit Varma]: Reading the book was an interesting experience to me.
[Amit Varma]: The characters and the way they thought about the world seemed very familiar to me.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, the world they inhabited and the way they chose to behave in that world
[Amit Varma]: felt surreal.
[Amit Varma]: Snigdha's book gave me an acute sense of the many parallel universes that exist within
[Amit Varma]: this one nation of ours, and I'm delighted that she's agreed to join me in the studio
[Amit Varma]: today, to talk about her experience of writing this book and the insights she gained from
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: But before we get to our conversation, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If this happens to be the only podcast you listen to, well, you need to listen to some
[Amit Varma]: more.
[Amit Varma]: Check out the ones from IVM podcast who co-produced the show with me.
[Amit Varma]: Go to ivmpodcast.com or download the IVM app and you'll find a host of great Indian podcasts
[Amit Varma]: that cover every subject you could think of.
[Amit Varma]: From the magazine I edit, Pragati, at thinkpragati.com, there is the Pragati podcast, hosted by Hamsini
[Amit Varma]: Hariharan and Pawan Srinath.
[Amit Varma]: There is a brilliant Hindi podcast, Puliyabazi, hosted by Pranay Koteswamy and Saurabh Chandra.
[Amit Varma]: And apart from these policy podcasts, IVM has shows that cover music, films, finance,
[Amit Varma]: sports, sci-fi, tech, and the LGBT community, all under one roof.
[Amit Varma]: Or rather, all in one app.
[Amit Varma]: So download the IVM podcast app today.
[Amit Varma]: Snegdha, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about how you decided to write this book to begin with.
[Amit Varma]: How did the idea of the book come to you?
[Guest]: Started on a dating website.
[Guest]: Back in the day, I think 2009, an American dating website has just entered the Indian
[Guest]: market.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, this was the time that everyone was talking about like India's hundreds of
[Guest]: millions of people joining the middle class.
[Guest]: So it was just natural that something of that kind would, you know, would tap into that
[Guest]: market.
[Guest]: So this website comes to India, and suddenly, everyone's on it.
[Guest]: And I read a couple of pieces just announcing its arrival and its popularity, and I signed
[Guest]: up for a long form piece for the Caravan magazine, where I was working then.
[Guest]: I signed up, and I made a very basic profile, which is just, you know, age, location, hobbies,
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: Put a very basic photo of myself and just like, let it out.
[Guest]: And I wake up the next morning, and I have hundreds of messages from young men, like,
[Guest]: you know, from 18 to, I would say, 32, 33.
[Guest]: That wasn't so surprising to me.
[Guest]: I expected some of that, I mean, not so many, but I expected some of that.
[Guest]: But what surprised me that not all of these messages were, you know, these like young
[Guest]: men declaring love or wanting to have sex with me or saying hi, baby, or the sort of
[Guest]: stuff that that usually comes in.
[Guest]: A lot of these people, and I started responding to some of them wanted to just talk to me
[Guest]: about about their lives, because no one was talking to them.
[Guest]: And I was a woman, I was real, I was talking to them.
[Guest]: And they were in the smallest of, you know, places in the, like, most obscure corners
[Guest]: in India, places that I've never heard of, like villages in Andhra Pradesh, and Northeast
[Guest]: and Tamil Nadu, and of course, UP and Bihar and the usual.
[Guest]: And some of them were telling me the same things, which is that, which is like a deep
[Guest]: feeling of frustration with where their lives were.
[Guest]: And with whatever prospects that, you know, stretched out in front of them, they were,
[Guest]: if they were in college, they didn't know if they were going to get jobs.
[Guest]: If they were already working, they weren't satisfied with their income, if they will
[Guest]: live with their family, they didn't know if they were fitting in, if their parents understood
[Guest]: them, they, most of them wanted to get out and make something of their lives, but didn't
[Guest]: know how.
[Guest]: And I mean, sure, there was a lot of anxiety about love and sex and romance.
[Guest]: And I did write about that, too.
[Guest]: But this stayed with me.
[Guest]: And I started thinking about that more deeply.
[Guest]: And but I just remained on the website and let these messages come.
[Guest]: And then shortly after that, I wrote another story that took me back into the same world.
[Guest]: This was something for the New York Times.
[Guest]: And I, I used to keep getting these, like, messages like spam, I'm sure everyone did,
[Guest]: and still does, about this personality development classes.
[Guest]: This was at least a huge rage in Delhi.
[Guest]: So every day I would wake up and I had these messages saying, you can develop your personality
[Guest]: for 2500 rupees a month come to this, like London School of English in Atparganj or somewhere
[Guest]: or the other.
[Guest]: And so one day, I just decided to show up because I was like, what is this personality?
[Guest]: And you know, who needs personality?
[Guest]: In what way is it being developed?
[Guest]: So I show up at a one of these like London School of English classes in Rajouri Garden.
[Guest]: And again, it is crowded with like, the same kind of people who were speaking to me from
[Guest]: across India on the dating website.
[Guest]: These were some very young men, I'm talking 17, 18, they had come to Delhi from small
[Guest]: towns and villages and because this was Delhi, Rajasthan and Haryana and UP.
[Guest]: And they were all either just out of college or had dropped out and were all looking for
[Guest]: opportunities in Delhi, and just didn't know how to be in a big city, how to, how to, you
[Guest]: know, talk to people, how to face an interview, how to approach a girl, that sort of thing,
[Guest]: you know, how to order things at a restaurant or, or talk to someone in a bus.
[Guest]: So that this was like, they were looking for to develop a more global personality and,
[Guest]: and how does it start?
[Guest]: And this, they, you know, it was basically a class in spoken English.
[Guest]: So it begins with an introduction, where are you from?
[Guest]: What do you want to do?
[Guest]: What are your hobbies?
[Guest]: And, and then like, you know, goes like pretty deep, pretty quickly.
[Guest]: And I, and I got to that later in the spoken English chapter for the book.
[Guest]: So you know, some of these themes were coming up.
[Guest]: And I had done three or four of these stories, when a penguin random house got in touch with
[Guest]: me and said that they had an idea, they wanted me to go back to my own small town, Ranchi,
[Guest]: and just be there for a while, at least at least a year, start talking to people, choose
[Guest]: some of them and see what they want from their lives.
[Guest]: And if you know, in the time that I'm following them, if they'll get any like anywhere close
[Guest]: to those, those dreams and desires.
[Amit Varma]: And like, what kind of preconceived notions did you go in with, which sort of turned out
[Amit Varma]: to not be the case when you went and what did you really learn through this process?
[Amit Varma]: How different is your eventual book from what you thought it would be?
[Amit Varma]: What did you think you would find which you did not?
[Guest]: I mean, honestly, I didn't know anything, which is hard for people to realize.
[Guest]: But I grew up in a cocoon of cocoons in small towns in North India, because my father was
[Guest]: a senior bureaucrat, and we always had a whole like system of like, you know, walls and boundaries
[Guest]: around us and think that as, as a girl who's growing up in an upper middle class family
[Guest]: in a bureaucratic setup, most avoid are like just young men on the loose.
[Guest]: And I, I just avoided them growing up.
[Guest]: And so I didn't know what like, you know, young men in North Indian villages and small
[Guest]: towns actually think and feel.
[Guest]: So it was, first of all, a challenge for me to like, go back and engage with that group
[Guest]: of people that I had, you know, done my best to avoid growing up.
[Guest]: So I didn't have that many notions.
[Guest]: I mean, I read the usual stuff that we all do, I knew that there was like a great wave
[Guest]: of aspiration, because that kept coming up, that people want big, shiny, fancy things.
[Guest]: And that, you know, small towns were like changing.
[Guest]: And there was suddenly like gyms and spas and hotels and restaurants.
[Guest]: But beyond that, I, I don't think that my understanding was at all extensive.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a very interesting sentence in your first chapter where you, you write a
[Amit Varma]: couple of evocative paragraphs about your growing up as a small town girl.
[Amit Varma]: And there you say, at one point, that quote, I was fortunate to become a thinking adult
[Amit Varma]: before post truth, unquote.
[Amit Varma]: So it's not just as if when you were in these small towns, you had kind of stayed in your
[Amit Varma]: cocoon.
[Amit Varma]: And now you went back and went beyond that.
[Amit Varma]: But also the times had changed fundamentally that the young men who grew up at the same
[Amit Varma]: time as you would not be the same as these young men you were now speaking to, who were
[Amit Varma]: growing up in an India where sort of there were so many more young people, there were
[Amit Varma]: so many more globalized influences.
[Guest]: Yes, they had so much more information and opinion.
[Guest]: And yes, I didn't expect that either.
[Amit Varma]: And I was very sort of struck by like a couple of the insights that come through your book
[Amit Varma]: is that everybody feels so incredibly entitled.
[Amit Varma]: And you said the further you go away from the cities, the bigger these young people
[Amit Varma]: think.
[Amit Varma]: So there is a sense of entitlement that I want to be great in the case of one of your
[Amit Varma]: protagonists.
[Amit Varma]: He wants to not just be prime minister, but eventually rule Mars after those guys go there.
[Amit Varma]: And along with this entitlement, there's also a lot of anger because those things aren't
[Amit Varma]: really happening.
[Amit Varma]: And at one level, it seems to me that these are sort of ingrained emotions.
[Amit Varma]: Young people everywhere tend to be like, I remember I was very entitled and angry when
[Amit Varma]: I was young.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, there seems to be a sense in your book that there is something
[Amit Varma]: different about the sense of entitlement that these guys feel, especially, for example,
[Amit Varma]: in the inside that the more you go towards small towns, the more you will find this.
[Amit Varma]: Why is that the case?
[Guest]: No, you're right.
[Guest]: I mean, I remember being a very ambitious young woman myself.
[Guest]: But I think that what has changed is that, you know, no matter where they are, like what
[Guest]: they're facing, what they're looking at, you know, the message that comes to them constantly
[Guest]: is that anything is possible.
[Guest]: You know, from I was listening to some of the Narendra Modi's speeches from 2014, he
[Guest]: actually speaks to them like a motivational speaker would.
[Guest]: He speaks about dreams.
[Guest]: He brings that up.
[Guest]: He says that their potential is being wasted, you know, that all of these like years of
[Guest]: opportunities have just like gone by and that, you know, that you dream and we will make
[Guest]: it possible sort of thing.
[Guest]: You know, you'll be listening to ads, you can be on the Internet.
[Guest]: I mean, so I think that it is very hard for a 19 year old in a village in Jharkhand to
[Guest]: be totally disconnected and not internalize any of these like several messages that filter
[Guest]: down to him on a daily basis.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, one of the backdrop of all this, a backdrop of what is happening in young India
[Amit Varma]: today, so to say, and the backdrop of your whole book is what you call India's 3E problem,
[Amit Varma]: which is that people are uneducated, unemployed and unemployable.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, the first and the third, uneducated and unemployable are part of the same thing.
[Amit Varma]: And even many educated people are unemployable because of the state of our education system.
[Amit Varma]: And your book really sort of divides the responses to this into these three sections where your
[Amit Varma]: first section is about how some people try to mitigate this and find opportunity in different
[Amit Varma]: ways.
[Amit Varma]: Your second section is about the enormous amount of anger out there and how that finds
[Amit Varma]: expression and the third section of your book is about and which I want to ask you about
[Amit Varma]: in detail later about how we have this mentality that the only way to get ahead is by scamming
[Amit Varma]: other people.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of talk section by section in the first chapter of your book.
[Amit Varma]: It was it's called the click baiter and it's this about this fascinating chap called Vinay
[Amit Varma]: Singhal and this company that he built called witty feed, which is, you know, you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: was number two in the world after BuzzFeed in terms of viral content.
[Amit Varma]: And it's almost as confluence of circumstances, which like a perfect storm which created them.
[Amit Varma]: Number one, he was a man with big dreams and like you mentioned before, quote, it almost
[Amit Varma]: seemed as if the further you live from a big city, the bigger your dreams, unquote.
[Amit Varma]: Second, he chose to go to indoor and set up this company.
[Amit Varma]: And again, you say in your book, quote, the city was big enough to be full of young job
[Amit Varma]: aspirants and small enough to present them with few options, unquote, and therefore fertile
[Amit Varma]: ground for him to find people to work with him.
[Amit Varma]: And it's very interesting how he hired all these young people with the condition that
[Amit Varma]: this would be absolutely the first job.
[Amit Varma]: And they were expected to immerse themselves in cultures which they knew nothing about
[Amit Varma]: and create content which would be compelling content for them.
[Amit Varma]: Like you describe a girl who's never dated in her life, who's 18 years old, who's creating
[Amit Varma]: content about what to do if you're jilted or so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And there's another really nice sentence in the book about this where you say, quote,
[Amit Varma]: a week at the company is all it takes them to go from not knowing anything about the
[Amit Varma]: world to deciding what the world should know.
[Amit Varma]: Full stop.
[Amit Varma]: And you've actually seen these people, they all live in a couple of bungalows together
[Amit Varma]: and so on, and it's like a family, like you mentioned, the way they where they work.
[Amit Varma]: And I found this whole ecosystem very fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And also, how the hell could they succeed?
[Amit Varma]: Because they literally didn't know anything about the people they were writing for.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: I mean, I guess I, I said at some point in the chapter that this was like the first time
[Guest]: I had met a set of people who lived in the internet.
[Guest]: So you know, they, everything that they know about the world is from the internet as the
[Guest]: man himself, Vinay Singhal, told me in one of his thoughtful monologues.
[Guest]: He said that the internet is the most powerful tool that, you know, the man has ever invented.
[Guest]: And I was blown away by it because there have been other tools.
[Guest]: But you know, you take an 18 year old, and she's, you know, writing an article about
[Guest]: how to build a swimming pool in your own house.
[Guest]: And I really wonder if that like comes from her own experiences, because she talks to
[Guest]: me about her family and where she lives, you know, in one rented room in Indore with her
[Guest]: mother and sister who've come from Gwalior to join her because of that passed away and
[Guest]: they would have left with nothing and she figured out about this company and she applied
[Guest]: for a job.
[Guest]: And so now she has to like give Americans all sorts of life hacks for all sorts of problems
[Guest]: when she does not know a thing about America or Americans or American like suburban life
[Guest]: and its challenges.
[Guest]: But she learns everything on the internet.
[Guest]: And so you know, she writes an article about how to build a swimming pool in your own house
[Guest]: and at least like, you know, 1.5 million people would have read it.
[Guest]: So, so that works.
[Amit Varma]: It's a great headline.
[Amit Varma]: I think I click on anything which offered to show me how to build a swimming pool in
[Guest]: my own apartment in Bombay.
[Guest]: No, I did click on how you've been brushing your teeth wrong all your life.
[Amit Varma]: And have you?
[Amit Varma]: All of us.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, I don't want to go and look for that story.
[Amit Varma]: And yeah, and what kind of struck me what you mentioned about living in the internet
[Amit Varma]: is that as much as they were living in India, they were also living in Americana, in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, it's almost wrong to say that she would not know what it is like to have
[Amit Varma]: a swimming pool in her own house.
[Guest]: Because yes, that is true in India, but in her virtual life on the internet, she's kind
[Guest]: of been through that.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, you wake up and literally the first thing you have to think of on your own,
[Guest]: I mean, with the help of the internet is you know, how to get lips like Kylie Jenner and
[Guest]: at least I knew who Kylie Jenner was, but like several people don't and, and that was
[Guest]: amazing to me.
[Guest]: And the thing is that I, what I want people to know is that this is not just these like
[Guest]: 80 kids in Indore.
[Guest]: I've met so many people like that when I was not reporting on WittyFeed, I was hanging
[Guest]: out with an Instagram with a friend of mine who is an Instagram friend of mine from Indore.
[Guest]: She was, she's 18, she was in college, and we became friends because she was fashion
[Guest]: blogging on Instagram.
[Guest]: And I was like interested in very young fashion bloggers in small towns who were actually
[Guest]: making money off this.
[Guest]: So I spent a couple of days in her hostel room in Indore.
[Guest]: She's from Bhopal, and she was in college in Indore.
[Guest]: And I met her at a very interesting time.
[Guest]: She was, she's just met someone that she liked on Instagram, who happened to be live in the
[Guest]: same city.
[Guest]: And she was going on her like, the very first date of her life with this man.
[Guest]: And I happened to be there in her hostel room at this moment.
[Guest]: And like, this is the most like, important moment in her life, because she's trying to
[Guest]: decide what she must wear for her first date with this man that she likes a lot.
[Guest]: And she had only three options.
[Guest]: And that I can't remember the third, but they were something that like Katy Perry had worn
[Guest]: the previous day or Selena Gomez had worn on her first date.
[Guest]: And so she was like, so she chose Selena Gomez's outfit.
[Amit Varma]: So you get small town knockoffs of this, which people buy?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: And it was actually a nice white shirt, such as the one I'm wearing, because obviously,
[Guest]: this is a, it's always a great outfit, but that was more surprising.
[Guest]: But the more time I spent with 18 year olds in places like that, I realized that it's
[Guest]: actually pretty usual for them, they may not have to think of Deepika Padukone at all,
[Amit Varma]: because they have the option.
[Amit Varma]: They can go straight to Kim Kardashian.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, so your second chapter is about, you know, another fascinating character called
[Amit Varma]: Mohin Khan, who teaches English.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, again, he is someone who is not even from a family where English is spoken,
[Amit Varma]: rather he serves those families in various ways.
[Amit Varma]: And he overcomes the class difference, takes an English class, because he views it as a
[Amit Varma]: ticket to another world, it's an aspirational thing, and in a sense, even a ticket to perhaps
[Amit Varma]: this cultural world of Americana and the internet and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And he learns that and at the end of his first course, he's immediately made the teacher
[Amit Varma]: and he you know, sort of starts teaching English and, and I found that chapter very fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, there's one paragraph, which is really interesting, and I'll just again, take the
[Amit Varma]: liberty of quoting that and it's full where you, after you speak about the whole ecosystem
[Amit Varma]: of language classes, you write, quote, the version of English they speak with colleagues,
[Amit Varma]: waiters, customer care executives, will define the future of the language in this country.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, the future of English worldwide, with India expected to have the largest number
[Amit Varma]: of English speakers in the world in the next 10 years, overtaking the US, the English they
[Amit Varma]: speak will be the English of the future, close quote.
[Amit Varma]: And the English they speak is, in a sense, a very functional sort of English where you're
[Amit Varma]: kind of getting by.
[Amit Varma]: And it's also, it has signaling value, it has functional value, and, and that's pretty
[Amit Varma]: much it.
[Amit Varma]: And that's, that's a big, how big was English in small town India, where you did your stories?
[Guest]: I think this was the most richest of all the worlds that I tried to describe in the book
[Guest]: through the various characters and, and I think that I was able to capture because of
[Guest]: the limits of word length sector, only a part of this because English was huge.
[Guest]: Everyone wanted to learn it.
[Guest]: Everyone had a very distinct opinion on it.
[Guest]: There was a large amount of like politics being played over it, especially in the in
[Guest]: the Hindi belt.
[Guest]: And it just seemed like, like, even in the in the lives of everyone else that I cover,
[Guest]: English played a part, you know, how they saw it, the relationship with it, if they
[Guest]: were using it, if they were not using it.
[Guest]: And so I think that it was it was really big.
[Amit Varma]: Was your speaking English something that put you in a pedestal in the eyes of these guys?
[Amit Varma]: Like, would they have given you the same access if say you were a Hindi journalist for a Hindi
[Amit Varma]: newspaper?
[Guest]: I sat in this spoken English class for at least on and off for at least three months.
[Guest]: And I wasn't allowed to say a word, forget a sentence, because I would have given myself
[Guest]: away and then like, like everyone else around me would have felt uncomfortable.
[Guest]: So yes, it was, in some sense, it did stop me from interviewing those kids, because Mohin
[Guest]: Khan asked me not to speak.
[Guest]: But yes, I mean, especially with him, I think he felt really connected to me because I was,
[Guest]: he really values a really small set of people with whom he can speak English in a, in a
[Guest]: fluent way, unlike with the students, and I was one of them.
[Guest]: So we remain in touch and he, you know, he, I think most of our conversations happened
[Guest]: in a mix of Hindi and English, but he kept bringing up how much he, he valued the fact
[Guest]: that I was, I was there with him to like, practice his fluent English.
[Amit Varma]: And just tangentially moving away from a bit from the book itself to your experience of
[Amit Varma]: writing it, that, you know, at first, when you approach these people, and you started
[Amit Varma]: interacting with them, they must have had sort of performative selves in front of you
[Amit Varma]: where they either trying to impress you or whatever, and then gradually they get comfortable
[Amit Varma]: and they let their guard down and they just themselves and how was this process and how
[Amit Varma]: how was your awareness of it influencing what went on?
[Guest]: In some sense, because these were young men, and I, in some cases, I wasn't that much older
[Guest]: to them.
[Guest]: There was, some of them kept trying to impress me in one way or the other, throughout.
[Guest]: So I don't think that that stopped being the case in some of the, in some cases, especially
[Guest]: with the Mr. Jharkhand turned aspiring Bollywood superstar, he was just from the first time
[Guest]: I met him, he just, he was vulnerable and honest, and he decided to like, you know,
[Guest]: just tell me everything, whether it was embarrassing, or it was silly, or, you know, it made him
[Guest]: look bad.
[Guest]: So there were some people like that and, and especially in the case of the BJP member,
[Guest]: the BJP, he was the most difficult for me to crack because he wanted to present an image.
[Guest]: And so no matter what I said, he would just try to like sound aggressive or tell me stories
[Guest]: of great swagger and importance.
[Guest]: And so I think that was one of the hardest stories for me to report because it took so
[Guest]: many, like meetings over so many months for me to like have a real conversation with him.
[Amit Varma]: Could that be because like maybe the Mr. Jharkhand guy, because of the class difference, he just
[Amit Varma]: already put you on a pedestal and you're not someone he's, you know, who is not from the
[Amit Varma]: same society as him almost.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore he felt comfortable in opening up to you.
[Amit Varma]: But the guy who worked in the BJP was much closer to being from a similar sort of background
[Amit Varma]: is in fact, your background was pretty similar to him.
[Guest]: You mentioned at one point, yes, yes and no.
[Guest]: I think it was not just class, but also worldviews and ideologies.
[Guest]: Because when I meet for the same chapter, when I meet a 19 year old member of Bajrang
[Guest]: Dal in Meerut, he, he comes from a very different social background as well, but he's very hostile
[Guest]: to me.
[Guest]: And, you know, I have to do a lot of convincing for this guy to talk to me and still to remain
[Amit Varma]: suspicious.
[Guest]: But I suppose, yes, class was always there, like in the case of the Mr. Jharkhand.
[Guest]: He had never spoken to a woman before.
[Guest]: And even the participants, even the female participants in the Ram shows that he had
[Guest]: begun to do wouldn't talk to him because he didn't speak good enough English for them.
[Guest]: So he did feel left out a lot.
[Guest]: And I think we came to a point where I was meeting him so often that it seemed to him
[Guest]: that we were dating, which was really odd because, you know, I would buy him coffee
[Guest]: and I would ask him questions and he would answer.
[Guest]: I was taking notes most of the time, but, but he had never like been with a woman in
[Guest]: that way.
[Amit Varma]: So, and also I'm guessing he had no exposure to journalism of the sort that you were doing
[Guest]: where you write.
[Guest]: No, I actually, there's one thing that I decided to do pretty early on, which is to explain
[Guest]: to them at great length what I was doing.
[Guest]: So I kept bringing up the fact that this book was now, you know, one third done or one fourth
[Guest]: done and that I was doing meeting these other people.
[Guest]: And I spoke to them about the importance of their stories and what they meant in a way
[Guest]: that was accessible to them.
[Guest]: But still, as you said, I mean, they couldn't have understood fully what I was trying to
[Guest]: do.
[Guest]: And at some point he asked me if I was his girlfriend and broke my heart, but I had to
[Guest]: tell him that I wasn't and he mustn't think that and we must keep meeting.
[Guest]: This was like, so the thing is, I wanted to be their friend.
[Guest]: I was not, it was never completely an interview with any of these people because I spoke about
[Guest]: myself.
[Guest]: They spoke to me about themselves.
[Guest]: It was more conversation, but at the same time, I think that it, for some time he remained
[Guest]: hurt and then we got back to the routine.
[Amit Varma]: And there's that classic journalist dilemma there that when you do a story on someone
[Amit Varma]: at some level, you're using them as instrumental to your purposes.
[Amit Varma]: And at the other level, you also want to relate to them as human beings and friends.
[Guest]: And was this something you thought about or something that was difficult?
[Guest]: I did constantly because there was this power imbalance and there were so many additional
[Guest]: tensions because of this like male female thing, especially because I was the only woman
[Guest]: in their lives and, you know, in this way, you know, outside of their families with whom
[Guest]: they were meeting, they were having coffee with, they were sometimes I traveled with
[Guest]: them.
[Guest]: Sometimes I followed them across cities and obviously it made them wonder why I was so
[Guest]: obsessed with them.
[Guest]: I was so interested in their lives.
[Guest]: It happened to me more than once that someone that I was following in this manner asked
[Guest]: me if that when was, when is our next date or something?
[Guest]: And so I had to explain again.
[Guest]: So, but I know, I guess, but thankfully these conversations spanned years.
[Guest]: So I think towards the end, they kind of got it and we remained friends and based like,
[Guest]: you know, I think the most important thing to do is to also tell them a lot about myself.
[Guest]: And I would talk about just daily lives, you know, the way that we did before this, starting
[Guest]: this podcast, like, you know, I woke up and did this and did that to my parents or my
[Guest]: sisters or whatever.
[Guest]: And that did make them feel a little more.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess as long as you were completely upfront with them at the start, then that
[Amit Varma]: helps you get over the thing.
[Amit Varma]: You know that you're not being deceptive in any way, even if they, even if yes, they are
[Amit Varma]: instrumental to your story, but they know that you're very clear about what you're doing.
[Guest]: So, yes.
[Guest]: So, I mean, this took me about three years to report.
[Guest]: I got married in the, in the middle of it.
[Guest]: And I told most of them that this was happening and they had, they felt really connected.
[Guest]: They advised me.
[Guest]: They asked me about the man's background and they checked him out on Facebook, of course.
[Guest]: Did they approve?
[Guest]: Some of them approved.
[Guest]: Some of them said that, you know, I should, marriage is a very important institution and
[Guest]: I must know that this is the right man.
[Guest]: And some of them like patronized about like the values of marriage and like, you know,
[Guest]: living a more responsible life from now on.
[Guest]: Because I, because I mean, obviously they thought I was a weirdo, like being a woman
[Guest]: and like being in all sorts of strange places at all sorts of like strange hours, asking
[Guest]: strange questions.
[Guest]: So, when I decided to get married, I thought that maybe this is when I become like normal.
[Amit Varma]: It's very interesting when you, you know, talking about marriage and strong opinions
[Amit Varma]: on it.
[Amit Varma]: One of the most fascinating parts of your book, which made me really sit up with my
[Amit Varma]: eyes wide open, was in that English class where you're sitting with Mohin Khan and he
[Amit Varma]: organizes this debate on arranged marriage versus love marriage between the girls and
[Amit Varma]: the boys.
[Amit Varma]: And it ends into a screaming match where they're shouting at each other, like it's Bhakts versus
[Amit Varma]: Congresses on Twitter.
[Amit Varma]: You know, that was the kind of feel I got from your writing, where people who wouldn't
[Amit Varma]: talk across the aisle, like the girls were almost segregated before the class and brought
[Amit Varma]: in later when the teacher came because they didn't want to intermingle, are suddenly just
[Amit Varma]: screaming at each other and getting personal.
[Amit Varma]: What was that like?
[Guest]: It's another thing that we don't understand, but the whole like, you know, think about
[Guest]: love and dating and sex and marriage just, there's so much anxiety and dilemma about
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: It's the case of women, because I made friends with some of these girls from the English
[Guest]: class and wow, their lives were very complicated.
[Guest]: I mean, each of them sort of knew that she had to ultimately go through arranged marriage
[Guest]: set by family, but they wanted before that to get as much out of life as they could.
[Guest]: So they had three or four boyfriends off Facebook who they were like hiding from each other.
[Guest]: And there were like three or four phones on which they were like playing this game.
[Guest]: And yeah, it was quite amazing.
[Amit Varma]: And I think it's one of the reader questions we have, and I was going to ask you at the
[Amit Varma]: end of the episode, but since it's just come up, that your book is all about guys.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that's with the exception of Richa Singh in one chapter.
[Amit Varma]: But I think that's kind of natural, because if you're looking at young India, a lot of
[Amit Varma]: what you visibly see is these disaffected young men who don't have jobs and the women
[Amit Varma]: are sort of in the background already suppressed, not so many options open to them.
[Amit Varma]: Not such, not really strong actors in their own lives as so many of the men are.
[Amit Varma]: Is that something you thought about during the book, or you just went with what came
[Amit Varma]: naturally that these are the, you know, subjects of my stories?
[Guest]: No, I wanted this to be out the mainstream, because I think that as a journalist, and
[Guest]: I had been working as a journalist for many years before I began this, I was interested
[Guest]: in stories of resistance against what was this mainstream, which was like male and young
[Guest]: and in some sense more North Indian than South Indian, more upper caste than anything else.
[Guest]: And so I just wanted to understand who these people are, that oppress like every, like
[Guest]: so many kinds of so many groups of people.
[Guest]: And the other thing I thought about was that I didn't want to make any effort finding anyone.
[Guest]: I was like, what if I just arrived in a place, walked on a street and start talking to people?
[Guest]: I will that that's the kind of thing that I wanted to do.
[Guest]: It was like, what is really like, who are these, like, you know, the most visible people
[Guest]: if you leave your home or hotel in a in a North Indian town, a young man, yes, a young
[Guest]: man, they have little to do, they're, they're literally all over the place, they are very
[Guest]: eager to talk.
[Guest]: And I just, I'd never spoken to them.
[Guest]: So I wanted to ask them what, what was going on in their lives, a friend of mine who just
[Amit Varma]: came back from Bihar painted this picture to me where he said that whenever he'd get
[Amit Varma]: out at a railway station or walk out on the street, he'd see this almost surreal sight
[Amit Varma]: of many, many, many young men just standing there doing just standing there.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: One of the things I did reporting from Haryana a couple of months ago is just take random
[Guest]: photos of public spaces, you know, streets or railway stations or like, bus stands, whatever.
[Guest]: And I'd like with no frame in mind or any like, structural ideas.
[Guest]: And I came back home and I started looking at the photos and like counting the number
[Guest]: of men that are there in every photo.
[Guest]: And it's amazing because all of these like pictures are full of men, they may be like
[Guest]: one or two women, and all of these places that I went to for reporting in police stations
[Guest]: and courts.
[Guest]: And so that that does tell you something.
[Guest]: And I think it's those men that I wanted to speak to.
[Amit Varma]: It's kind of a haunting image, just men just standing there hundreds of young men not doing
[Amit Varma]: anything and that that kind of makes you worried.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to sort of now move on to questions about the second section of your book or the
[Amit Varma]: anger section in a sense, but let's take a quick commercial break before that.
[Unknown]: Hey, it's been another great week on IBM.
[Unknown]: Are you following us on social media yet?
[Unknown]: If not, you definitely should be where IBM podcast on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram.
[Unknown]: Last week, we released a brand new show called Know Your Kanun with lawyer Ambar Rana.
[Unknown]: This week, Ambar talks about the laws and rights related to sexual harassment in public
[Unknown]: spaces.
[Unknown]: On the kinetic living podcast, Rumi talks to none other than Rajesh Kumar, aka Rosesh
[Unknown]: from Sarabhai Vs. Sarabhai to talk about his fitness transformation.
[Unknown]: On Shunia One, we had an interesting conversation about all things money, insurance and more
[Unknown]: with Mukesh Kalra from ET Money.
[Unknown]: On the Colaba Cartel, this week, Abhishek and Gauri talked to me about their philosophy
[Unknown]: of building and organizing a team.
[Unknown]: On the scene and the unseen, Amit Verma talks to the journalist and author Snigdha Poonam
[Unknown]: about her first book Dreamers, which chronicles the aspirations of a young India.
[Unknown]: On the Pragati podcast, Pawan and Hamsari decode the concept and the meaning of the
[Unknown]: term Swaraj with Professor Akash Singh Rathore.
[Unknown]: We have also released a new podcast called Wordy Wordpecker with Rachel Lopez where she
[Unknown]: deciphers a new word every week.
[Unknown]: I'm not revealing what this week's word was, so check it out to make sure.
[Unknown]: Also guys, we are hiring a new producer, a social media intern and a graphic designer.
[Unknown]: If anybody's interested, please apply to jobs at IndusVox.com.
[Unknown]: And with that, continue with your show.
[Amit Varma]: Snigdha, welcome back to the show.
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: I now want to talk about the second part of your book, which really has two chapters dealing
[Amit Varma]: on how people deal with their anger.
[Amit Varma]: And the first of them I was sort of very struck by because your two main characters in that
[Amit Varma]: one of them is someone who breaks up love jihads in Jharkhand, I think, right?
[Guest]: In Meerut.
[Amit Varma]: In Meerut, who breaks up love jihads and the other is a Gaurakshak.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, these are not the two only sort of angry people you came across.
[Amit Varma]: There's a lot of anger out there, which you describe throughout your book.
[Amit Varma]: But these are at the same time fairly representative of two of the typical directions that the
[Amit Varma]: anger goes in that it finds an outlet in tribalism, almost sort of instinctive tribalism, where
[Amit Varma]: in these two cases, it becomes a question of Hindu pride and all Muslims are bad.
[Amit Varma]: And it finds these different kinds of outlets in the case of one interreligious couplings
[Amit Varma]: and the other cows.
[Amit Varma]: And how widespread is this and you know, did you feel that this is the most natural outlet
[Amit Varma]: for their anger?
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Guest]: I mean, the one of the people that I describe in the book is, is very different, though.
[Guest]: I mean, he's middle class, he's a very respectable member of the BGP, he's, you know, he's, he's
[Guest]: a part of the discussions on elections and election management, etc.
[Guest]: And, and he's very different in that, you know, when I started speaking to him, he's
[Guest]: he's talking about big, grand things and not like beating up people or, or breaking up.
[Guest]: Imagine Love Jihad, he's talking about Gandhi and Nehru and, you know, the imbalances of
[Guest]: power in in the world and like, civilizations like histories and, and how to rethink them.
[Guest]: And so we keep having these conversations.
[Guest]: And I keep thinking that, that maybe something will come out of this, but, but towards the
[Guest]: end, as it becomes more and more open with me, he, he brings up some of the same things
[Guest]: that these Bajrang Dal karikartas in Meerut, or the Gaurakshaks in Haryana bring up later,
[Guest]: which is, you know, that, that Hindus have been treated badly in this country, or, you
[Guest]: know, Muslims are reproducing too much, or, you know, Dalits are taking all the jobs,
[Guest]: or, you know, the, you know, the women just don't know their place in the society anymore.
[Guest]: So that's the same sort of stuff.
[Guest]: And I think that those are the same set of things that I kept hearing from, like young
[Guest]: men, at least like across North India, no matter, you know, what their social background.
[Guest]: And so yes, I was pretty widespread, I tried to choose people who had more to say about
[Guest]: that whose stories were more complicated than, or like, I could find something about them
[Guest]: that wasn't obvious in these statements.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I'd always thought that tribalism, or the tribal instinct, in a sense is ingrained
[Amit Varma]: within us.
[Amit Varma]: And it's just that as societies progress more and more, you know, culture mitigates that
[Amit Varma]: and there's no reason to be tribal and that instinct is sort of mitigated simply by culture
[Amit Varma]: and enlightenment values and so on.
[Amit Varma]: But what seems to be happening here is that tribal instincts evolved in times of scarcity.
[Amit Varma]: And if you are living in a time of a scarcity of some kind, in this kinds, whether it's
[Amit Varma]: of jobs, or whether it's of different kinds of opportunities.
[Guest]: Women, in some of the cases, they can't, in places like Haryana, they can't find women
[Amit Varma]: to marry.
[Amit Varma]: So they become very angry with, like one of the quotes I noted down from that chapter
[Amit Varma]: is the gentleman in Karnal who told you, quote, since every girl in Karnal has a boyfriend,
[Amit Varma]: I don't know whether I will ever be married.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: Unquote.
[Guest]: I mean, look at the sex ratio of Haryana.
[Guest]: It will be very difficult for him to find a bride and he's concerned about that.
[Guest]: And that makes him very angry and he has to find an outlet.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, are these people also in a sense India's incels?
[Amit Varma]: In a sense, yes.
[Amit Varma]: You know, and are these therefore scarcities of jobs, scarcity of sexual opportunities
[Amit Varma]: leading to this anger, which obviously will then take a tribal form, it's almost inevitable.
[Amit Varma]: And would you then say that is something that's gotten worse over the last few years?
[Amit Varma]: And it actually seems to be happening worldwide in different forms.
[Amit Varma]: And if so, is it going to continue getting worse?
[Guest]: So first of all, I wish there was only simply a lack of opportunities that drove these,
[Guest]: you know, thousands of men across India to murder and mime people.
[Guest]: But it's something deeper than that.
[Guest]: I mean, I have now reported on Gaurakshaks alone for some years, and I've met so many
[Guest]: kinds of Gaurakshaks.
[Guest]: You know, there are people who are middle-aged, you know, doctors and there are 22-year-olds
[Guest]: who have ice cream shops and they're, you know, this guy is in the book as an insurance
[Guest]: salesman.
[Guest]: So it's not always that they don't have anything to do.
[Guest]: I think the source of their anger sometimes is deeper.
[Guest]: Sometimes it is not how they are doing, but how people who shouldn't be, you know, doing
[Guest]: that well are doing well or doing better than them.
[Guest]: Like in the case of this chap in Meerut, he's angry at how, you know, the young Muslim men
[Guest]: in his neighborhood have been able to build houses or date attractive women that he would
[Guest]: he would like to date.
[Guest]: So he's angry about all those things.
[Guest]: And you know, in some cases, it is about jobs, but it's not always about their own lack of
[Guest]: opportunities or jobs or upward mobility.
[Guest]: They're equally angry about the fact that the people who should have remained below
[Guest]: them have now like surpassed them in either income or education or attraction to women
[Guest]: really can be anything.
[Guest]: And then, and especially in some of the cases in the more patriarchal belts of North India,
[Guest]: I think Haryana for one, there was this deep rooted anxiety about how their families weren't
[Guest]: respecting them, you know, that their mothers and their bhabis and whatever, you know, the
[Guest]: women in the family or the older male members of the family was not giving them the kind
[Guest]: of izzat that like a young man at that age should receive.
[Guest]: So that also like played into this anger that some of them did turn card carrying Gaurakshaks
[Guest]: because of that, because they felt like if they did go out on these raids night after
[Guest]: night carrying revolvers and coming back with these amazing stories and WhatsApp photographs
[Guest]: of rescued cows and beaten up Muslim cattle smugglers, then they will regain that kind
[Guest]: of respect in the eyes of their own families, their own neighborhoods, their own local police
[Guest]: thana, their local RSS shakhas, etc.
[Amit Varma]: And that's kind of the scary part of this, like, in a sense, if you have anger, if you're
[Amit Varma]: driven to these tribalistic narratives, it would be okay if you express that on the internet
[Amit Varma]: and you told people on Twitter, but in your everyday life, you're forced to behave normally,
[Amit Varma]: because that's a society.
[Amit Varma]: But in the case of all of these people that you've written about, and that you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: in that chapter, they are incentivized to actually act out their violence, because that's
[Amit Varma]: a way of raising their status within their in group.
[Amit Varma]: So it's not only that they feel this resentment, but there is actually, they raise their own
[Amit Varma]: social status by, in the case of the gentlemen in Meerut, just beating up couples on Valentine's
[Amit Varma]: Day, in the case of the cow rakshaks, just doing whatever it takes to sort of fight something
[Guest]: which is really imaginary, in a sense.
[Guest]: And at the same time, and I didn't, I hadn't fully even explored it by the time I wrote
[Guest]: the last draft, but the levels to which, because this is only happening right now, the levels
[Guest]: to which that anger is channeled institutionally, I mean, even in 2014 or 15, when I was reporting
[Guest]: this book, I found several, you know, smaller groups of Hindu interest cropping up everywhere,
[Guest]: not just the usual RSS and Bajrang Dal and VHP, but Akhil Bharat, this and that, or,
[Guest]: you know, Meerut Shetty, this and that.
[Amit Varma]: Or the kind of people who killed Kalburgi and...
[Guest]: Yes, but now these groups are really multiplying, mushrooming, whatever you call it, like,
[Guest]: you can go on Facebook, type any city, the smallest of towns in India, and it'll have
[Guest]: at least like a dozen of these groups.
[Guest]: I just keep doing this from time to time, just to like, you know, track the progress
[Guest]: of this trend.
[Guest]: But the smallest of towns...
[Amit Varma]: No, you don't.
[Amit Varma]: You're a closet bigot.
[Amit Varma]: You are a fangirl.
[Guest]: They will have Akhil Bharat, blah, blah, blah, and there will be like dozens of these groups.
[Guest]: Some of these like members will be common, but most of them will, each of them will be
[Guest]: able to attract hundreds of people who are very active on on Facebook, each of them wants
[Guest]: to like, you know, raise his profile on Facebook and WhatsApp through whatever, whatever, you
[Guest]: know, fake news they can spread or whatever, like, real time violence they can inflict
[Guest]: and then take photos of and post.
[Amit Varma]: And that's scary, because it's, it's mind blowingly scary, because it's a vicious circle
[Amit Varma]: in that case, because if you want to belong to a group in a small town, these are kind
[Amit Varma]: of the groups you'll be drawn towards, because, you know, and it just perpetuates itself.
[Guest]: And yes, but because because what happened, for example, in the case of the disruption
[Guest]: of namaz in Gurgaon, was that when I spoke to some of these young men who had disrupted
[Guest]: the namaz, they said that they'd initially been trained as wrestlers in their villages,
[Guest]: RSS shakha, but it was too, but when RSS was a very moderate and modest reference point
[Guest]: for them, you know, like a group for them.
[Guest]: So they had been looking for more and more aggressive leaders and organizations with
[Guest]: which to associate themselves, like one of them told me that he has now linked himself
[Guest]: to this man is a long name Swami Paramanand something something.
[Guest]: And whose claim to fame is that he has built an army of 1500 people in UP who will fight
[Guest]: ISIS.
[Guest]: And like all they do all day is just like, you know, do arms training and, you know,
[Guest]: engage in this very alarmist view of the future of India.
[Guest]: And because RSS, for this guy, RSS was just not giving him the kind of like opportunities
[Guest]: for brazen violence against whoever is his enemy, as he's desired.
[Guest]: So he has to leave that umbrella and choose like more and more extremist, like validation
[Guest]: from the Hindu interest umbrella, so it's almost a race to the bottom.
[Guest]: Yes, it was a race to the bottom, which is what scared me that we keep thinking that,
[Guest]: you know, RSS is like taking over in India, and we are all doomed, but there are worse
[Amit Varma]: entities.
[Amit Varma]: I keep talking about the Jan Sang Kam BJP that every leader made the previous guy look
[Unknown]: moderate.
[Amit Varma]: So Atal Bihari made Shyama Prasad look moderate and then Advani to Atal Bihari and Modi to
[Amit Varma]: Advani and Adityanath to Modi and somebody will one day horror of horrors make Adityanath
[Guest]: look moderate.
[Guest]: I went to a press conference of these all self-styled extreme Hindu leaders and they
[Guest]: said, you know, Yogi kuch nahi hai, Modi has failed us, Advani to bahut budha ho gaya hai
[Guest]: and take any name, they were like, Togadia has vanished after fear.
[Guest]: So it's us and it is going to be our revolvers and lattes.
[Amit Varma]: Which means inevitably, they will never feel satisfied with any of the people who go into
[Amit Varma]: politics because those guys will be moderated by necessary compromises and therefore, eventually
[Amit Varma]: these people will want to take the law into their own hands.
[Guest]: They are.
[Guest]: I mean, that happened in the case of the Namaz in Gurgaon.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: And that Swamiji's paramilitary force of 1500 people should just be airdropped to actually
[Amit Varma]: fight ISIS in Syria, that would be nice.
[Amit Varma]: But they will fight like Namazis in Gurgaon.
[Amit Varma]: Which is even worse, or infidels like us who are born Hindu but dare to be secular or whatever
[Amit Varma]: it is that we are.
[Amit Varma]: And all of these people naturally are not just bigoted, but they're also deeply misogynist.
[Amit Varma]: And that makes the fifth chapter of your book on Richa Singh from Allahabad extremely fascinating
[Amit Varma]: where you describe about how Allahabad University is sort of a hotbed of young male violence
[Amit Varma]: almost my words, not yours, which and no woman has ever stood for elections there because
[Amit Varma]: it's completely unthinkable because in the power structures, they are just so suppressed
[Amit Varma]: that they're not even seen in public during elections because there are violent young
[Guest]: men roaming around.
[Amit Varma]: Quote unquote, anything can happen, anything can happen.
[Amit Varma]: And this young girl called Richa Singh decides that she is going to stand for president of
[Amit Varma]: the Allahabad University Students Union.
[Amit Varma]: And, and you describe the responses against her and did you sort of feel that her standing
[Amit Varma]: up against the patriarchy, as she puts it, is sort of an aberration, or is it a sign
[Amit Varma]: that things might be changing?
[Guest]: An aberration, I think, because as I when I'm winding up in the last in the conclusion,
[Guest]: when I try to catch up with what was going on in Allahabad student politics, in the time
[Guest]: that I hadn't checked, few women had followed up, they like the couple of elections that
[Guest]: happened after hers were even more violent, and women had stayed away, etc, etc.
[Amit Varma]: So, and she also got co opted into the system joined the Samajwadi party.
[Amit Varma]: She got an MLA ticket that she went by the way, no, she lost, because that was the that
[Amit Varma]: was a sweep.
[Guest]: But she's quite active in the Samajwadi election schemes right now, like, you know, she was
[Guest]: very active behind the scenes of the Phool Phool election or by elections.
[Guest]: I mean, I don't know how cynical to feel about her being with the Samajwadi party, but I
[Amit Varma]: wonder what else she could have done.
[Amit Varma]: But what was telling to me is your detailed descriptions of the rage that the young men
[Amit Varma]: of Allahabad expressed towards most of which was because she was a woman and not because
[Amit Varma]: she was from the other party or whatever, yes, the threats that she got, for example,
[Amit Varma]: that if you come out of your hostel, we will rape you and so on.
[Amit Varma]: Just and do you think that rage would be the same all across small town India because of
[Amit Varma]: how misogynist we are?
[Guest]: No, of course, it's more North Indian than anything, I think that I would be joking if
[Guest]: I said that this level of patriarchy, misogyny, and I shouldn't even say North India, I mean,
[Guest]: some parts are worse than the others.
[Guest]: Like I, I grew up in a very different North India than the one that I encountered in Allahabad.
[Guest]: Because you know, you're talking about decades and decades of that kind of male entitlement
[Guest]: that you know, you feel that women shouldn't even come out at the time of student elections.
[Guest]: So it was, it did blow me away in the worst kinds of ways.
[Amit Varma]: And would you say this kind of entitlement is actually worse than previous generations?
[Amit Varma]: Because these young people have been exposed to what's happening around the world, and
[Amit Varma]: they can't they can see it, but they can't actually touch any of it themselves.
[Amit Varma]: And that leads to greater anger.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: And a lot of the anger that I described in the preceding chapter, young angry men, the
[Guest]: you know, a lot of their anger was also against women.
[Guest]: In most of these cases, they were angry that the women around them just weren't behaving
[Guest]: the way that the women should do on in some cases, simply that they had no hope of finding
[Guest]: a wife or in the case of the love, you know, the Bajrang Dal Karkarta in Meerut, after
[Guest]: a whole day of like being hateful about everyone else, to me, he, I go back home, I go back
[Guest]: to my hotel, he goes back home.
[Guest]: And he sends me a message on WhatsApp, saying something.
[Guest]: And I, I look at his display photo, and it's a red teddy bear or something.
[Guest]: And I was like, Wow, you're, dude, you're a softie.
[Guest]: For all your you know, I'm going to like kill and finish all my enemies.
[Amit Varma]: The metrosexual love jihad warrior.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Guest]: The sensitive side.
[Amit Varma]: He will beat up the couple and then he will cry for them.
[Amit Varma]: And then he will put makeup on the cops is sorry.
[Amit Varma]: Moving on to sort of the third section of your book, which was also kind of fascinating
[Amit Varma]: and entirely expected in terms of that was a part of the book, which was sort of least
[Amit Varma]: surprising to me in a sense, I mean, a lot of things about your book were eye opening
[Amit Varma]: to me.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, the fact that at one point in the book, you say, it seemed much easier to
[Amit Varma]: become successful feeding on other people's dreams and following your own.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, just to take a slight digression to economics, this is something like Jagdish
[Amit Varma]: Bhagwati once said was a difference between China and India, where he said that in China,
[Amit Varma]: people tend to be profit seeking.
[Amit Varma]: But in India, people tend to be rent seeking.
[Amit Varma]: And I actually have a theory that this is partly because of the structures of our government,
[Amit Varma]: where government is so all powerful and so pervasive, that the easiest way to make money
[Amit Varma]: is actually to feed off that power in some way to either rent seek or to essentially
[Amit Varma]: play a zero sum game where you're exploiting someone and not a positive sum game where
[Amit Varma]: you're trying to do something which will create value in somebody's life and like even the
[Guest]: English teachers, for example, the English teachers are playing that positive and the
[Amit Varma]: fixer, Mr. Prasad are playing that positive game where they're trying to do things for
[Amit Varma]: other people and they're both benefiting, but a lot of the people in this last section
[Amit Varma]: of your book, the scammers, which I think is much more representative of India and not
[Amit Varma]: just small town India today, but India, since I have, you know, in all the years that I've
[Amit Varma]: spent here, is that people have this scammy mentality of how can I exploit someone and
[Amit Varma]: make money rather than how can I sort of add value to the world and if anything, I'd imagine
[Amit Varma]: that is probably getting worse because of the scarcities that we sort of discussed that
[Amit Varma]: it's just this attitude that the one way to get rich or to make money is to exploit somebody
[Amit Varma]: else, you know, where if you're not scamming somebody, you're getting scammed, that kind
[Amit Varma]: of mentality. And I also felt that, you know, the people you mentioned in the first part
[Amit Varma]: of your book, the guys who are making something out of their lives, Vinay Singhal or Witty
[Amit Varma]: Feed or Moin Khan, the English teacher, are in one sense the outliers, you know, in a
[Amit Varma]: sense, they're not all like that. It would be the survivorship bias to say that that's
[Amit Varma]: your typical young Indian. They are the lucky guys who despite who actually sort of found
[Amit Varma]: that way. But I would imagine that your typical young Indian would fall more in the people
[Amit Varma]: you describe in your last couple of chapters, the scamsters who are either scamming or getting
[Guest]: scammed. Would you agree with that?
[Guest]: Absolutely, absolutely. And I think that's that you couldn't have been more right. You
[Guest]: know, when we were talking about this earlier, but a million people enter the job market
[Guest]: every month, and we don't have any estimates, but maybe anywhere between 10,000 and 25,000
[Guest]: people find jobs in the formal economy, we have a very vast informal economy in which
[Guest]: hundreds of 1000s of people must go as delivery boys and drivers and small factory workers,
[Guest]: it still leaves out hundreds of 1000s of people who are like, even in this vast informal economy,
[Guest]: I didn't understand that that world really well. And so, you know, I mean, what I wanted
[Guest]: to do for the last chapter was actually just try to be a job seeker in the entry level
[Guest]: market and try to get a job. And, and this is what what happened. And most of the jobs
[Guest]: that I found that I could be offered did require me to pull some or the other kind of con.
[Guest]: And so in a sense, yes, those are the majority of like, you know, the young Indians about
[Guest]: whom I was trying to write this book.
[Amit Varma]: And you can't even blame them or make a you know, judge them for it. Because you know,
[Amit Varma]: as you say in that chapter, quote, as young men with no prospects, they are the biggest
[Amit Varma]: victims and the whole world is a big scam. Stop quote, which is kind of how they see
[Amit Varma]: themselves. They're saying the world is a scam. We are victims. Why should we not scam
[Amit Varma]: others? It's a zero sum game. You know, you you just, you try to get on top of it.
[Guest]: Yes, I don't think that many of them start out by with the scammy mentality at all. Some
[Guest]: of them do. Some of them are really good at this job. They're extremely good at Jugaad.
[Guest]: You know, you show them a scam, and they're like, you know, pick up tricks of trade and
[Guest]: matter of hours, they're very good at building a network, you know, drawing like resources
[Guest]: from other like, stakeholders in the business, you know, they can they can really scale up
[Guest]: from 4000 pounds to 40,000 pounds in a week. So I also met some amazing like talent in
[Guest]: the world of call center scams. But the majority of like the soldiers, the call center executives
[Guest]: that I met, didn't start out by buying been trying to being scammy. In fact, for so many
[Guest]: of them like drop out after the first day of training or after they were giving a script
[Guest]: or something because they just they just can't do it. Every day, I receive an email from
[Guest]: an ex-scammer because obviously they can't go to the police because like they're so afraid
[Guest]: of whatever and they will describe to me the entire like modes of operation of their companies
[Guest]: addresses, like you know, the the location details of the masterminds the ways to like
[Guest]: bust those companies and what's more important their justifications for why they did it to
[Guest]: me and it's not really important but I keep receiving them by by received one last week
[Guest]: long one saying, you know, I pulled up this was an amazing scam. You remember that the
[Guest]: time they busted the IRS scam in Mumbai. So the IRS was the American scam. So because
[Guest]: that was busted, they realized that sure the Internal Revenue Service in the US is like
[Guest]: on to them, but there are you know, like excise and tax state services in Canada and New Zealand
[Guest]: and Australia. So so that's that's how that spread. So this guy was impersonating a Canadian
[Guest]: tax officer every day, and like scamming dozens of people making lots of money and one day
[Guest]: is like he stops being able to sleep because he has like gone so many innocent people and
[Guest]: so he writes me an email saying this is my entire script it runs into pages it is so
[Guest]: elaborate and sophisticated. He tells me that he stopped being able to sleep and then he
[Guest]: had to quit the job because he can't take this anymore. And then he gives me all the
[Guest]: tips on how to bust this company in some sector in Gurgaon or whatever. I still haven't done
[Guest]: it. But are you going to do it? I just I just might. But I've busted a few. So millions
[Amit Varma]: of company owners from Gurgaon listening to this podcast now suddenly panicking. Is it
[Guest]: us? No, but that remain the most common kind of scammer I met, which is, you know, arrived
[Guest]: from Jodhpur or Ludhiana. They're inundated with like these job offers on the internet
[Guest]: of immediate incentives and like crazy career growth. They show up at a company, it's gone,
[Guest]: they think, bas do maine kaam karna hai. And then you know, I'll get out, I'll have like,
[Guest]: I'll have like, you know, 40,000 in salary, I'll have like, a couple of lakhs in incentives
[Guest]: and I'll, I'll do something mainly startup or, or find a real job. It just doesn't work
[Guest]: out. There was this guy who told me that for two years, he went from like, a job ad to
[Guest]: a job ad in Delhi, like he said, mai kahan pe kahan nahi gaya, Gurgaon, Noida, Faridabad,
[Guest]: everywhere I went, ma'am, I was required to like do some some or the other like unethical
[Guest]: thing. And at some point, he cheated someone who, like an old guy who just wanted to change
[Guest]: his Facebook password, but didn't know how to so was so he looked up, you know, how to
[Guest]: change it must be really old, how to change your Facebook password. And there are companies
[Guest]: who obviously based India who advertise their services in that field. So he called up this
[Guest]: call center in India to change his Facebook password and the scammer took all his money
[Guest]: in the bank. And anyway, it's a sad story. But many of them like, have like sadder stories.
[Amit Varma]: Sounds like my dad, how to change your Facebook password. It's really sad because many of
[Amit Varma]: these scammers have been scammed into scamming. Yes, you know, it's Yes. So I you know, I
[Amit Varma]: have one last question for you. But before I ask that, we have a bunch of questions.
[Amit Varma]: Your legion of followers on Twitter have sent us we put out a call on Twitter asking for
[Amit Varma]: people to send questions. And we got nine questions from there. And there's a 10th question
[Amit Varma]: which a friend of mine sent me on WhatsApp. So we should just again, tremendous, we should
[Amit Varma]: advertise this on WhatsApp. Yeah, we should set up one of those. You know, so many people
[Guest]: who run all these WhatsApp groups. I met one who ran 100 WhatsApp groups of hatred. You
[Guest]: mentioned that the local BJP IT cell of Jharkhand, I think was it? Haryana. Sorry, it's all the
[Guest]: same to me. I was born in Haryana people. You weren't born in Haryana. I was born in
[Amit Varma]: Chandigarh. Okay, fine. Yeah. And my dad was in the IAS and the Haryana carder. So you
[Guest]: could argue about bad things about Haryana. Please forgive me. Bad things about me as
[Amit Varma]: well. Right. So okay, here's one from my friend and he's been a guest on the show in the past.
[Amit Varma]: The legal expert Alok Prasanna Kumar, who asked a very good question. If you had the
[Amit Varma]: power of a God to fulfill the dreams of one person you write about in dreamers, who among
[Amit Varma]: them would you choose? I think the English coach the Moeen Khan, because he's actually
[Guest]: adding value to the world and making the lives of others better. He's a nice guy. Yes. And
[Unknown]: he really he's his journey has been remarkable. You know, are you still in touch with him?
[Amit Varma]: I am still in touch with him. Okay. Excellent. So this was from Alok Prasanna Kumar at Alok
[Amit Varma]: Pai on Twitter. Then Apekshita Varshney at Apekshita V asked a question about she quoted
[Amit Varma]: a para which Taleb had written about the fallacy people tend to commit when they talk about
[Amit Varma]: the youth. I won't really ask that or quote that para because you're not committing that
[Guest]: fallacy here, which is essentially the survivorship bias kind of thing. You answer it yourself.
[Amit Varma]: So I since you're not committing that fallacy, we will not ask the question. Then internet
[Amit Varma]: Bindu at internet Bindu asked, given lack of jobs, inequality, etc. It seems India could
[Amit Varma]: be a lot more violent, like say South Africa or Mexico. Do you think there's a risk of
[Guest]: those countries levels of violence in India? You know, India has the world's like second
[Guest]: highest rate of murders after Brazil. So we may not immediately see India as one of the
[Amit Varma]: most dangerous countries on this earth, but it is. And also if internet Bindu like me
[Amit Varma]: lives in a big city, it's possible that they're biased by their immediate surroundings and
[Guest]: don't really realize how terribly violent small town. Yes. And everywhere. I think there
[Guest]: are you know, I mean, Indians murder thousands of people every year. And the number one motive
[Guest]: for those murders, if I'm not wrong, is personal vendetta. And a lot of this like personal
[Guest]: vendetta and this has been studied by at least a few people like comes from these like hundreds
[Guest]: of millions of young people who are not gainfully engaged. So there's, there's a lot of like
[Amit Varma]: anger and frustration.
[Amit Varma]: Gainfully engaged, because that has multiple meanings. It addresses the other side of the
[Amit Varma]: issue. Also, a lot of this violence is not something that you can ever measure. For example,
[Amit Varma]: the implicit violence against women, which is constant and pervasive and
[Guest]: No, not just that. But I think that each kind of like violence and because I've been reporting
[Guest]: on conflicts for the newspaper job for so many years, but if you take class or caste
[Guest]: or gender or religion, I keep running into the same sort of like, anger and and it's
[Guest]: always like, you know, young men at the center. So we're already seeing that we're already
[Guest]: seeing the outcome of that in like the rates of crime, you know, the rates of like rapes
[Guest]: and whatever. And plus, like, there have been so many violent protests and riots. You know,
[Guest]: over the last three or four years, and I don't think that will like, lead up in a sort of
[Guest]: Mexico sort of way, because we are so divided that each group of violent young men have
[Guest]: their own issues. But we will see this like, like going ahead, I think that the whole isolated
[Guest]: like groups of men, outraging, killing miming across India will definitely go up. I don't
[Amit Varma]: know what's your
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, I totally agree. And it's scary. And it also when you consider, you know, why
[Amit Varma]: are young men so violent, and there's a biological aspect of that I was listening to this podcast
[Amit Varma]: with Robert Sapolsky recently, he's written the excellent book called behave. And I think
[Amit Varma]: it was him. And one insight I gained from that was that young men's brains develop fully
[Amit Varma]: only by the age of 25. So that's how long it takes to actually socialize, your brain
[Amit Varma]: is still developing, which is why you find so much violence in the years before that
[Amit Varma]: and women's brains develop, I think, by the late teens. So they are already more chilled
[Amit Varma]: out, socialized, and you're likely to see less violence from them. And of course, there
[Amit Varma]: are various other cultural and biological factors for that. But this is kind of interesting
[Amit Varma]: that yeah, and leads to also then deeper philosophical questions of should you hold a man at 30 necessarily
[Amit Varma]: culpable for violence he committed at 20? Because hey, he had a different brain. I'm
[Amit Varma]: not arguing that he should, by the way, but these are just interesting sort of philosophical
[Amit Varma]: questions. Now there is a question from someone whose name on Twitter is RK2832. But their
[Amit Varma]: Twitter handle and I noticed this is at RK28321, that extra digit at the end. So I don't know
[Amit Varma]: what that means. But this person may be other RK2832. Yeah, so you Yeah, so he had to add
[Amit Varma]: a one to Yeah. So just to clarify which RK2832, this is the one with the one. And this person
[Amit Varma]: writes, please ask her to do the same journey in South India. And it would be interesting
[Amit Varma]: to compare both similarities and differences. So I'm not going to criticize you for writing
[Amit Varma]: a book that you didn't set out to write. But just speculating allowed if you what do you
[Amit Varma]: think the differences would be if you went down south?
[Guest]: I have I have spoken to several young men. My apologies for assuming this. In South India,
[Guest]: they didn't feature in the book. But yes, I think that it's less patriarchal. I think
[Guest]: that there if there are aggressive men, then they aren't as like visible and as like, outspoken
[Guest]: as you would find in UP or Bihar.
[Amit Varma]: Why do you think that is?
[Guest]: I think they're like, you know, they're the cultures in in North India are, you know,
[Guest]: there are obviously some very clear reasons. I mean, education is, is really big. You know,
[Guest]: I mean, some of the things that the men in South India take for granted, the men, such
[Guest]: as I was speaking to in North India found very hard to grapple with the you know, the
[Guest]: women going to school or wanting to leave their homes or live in the cities or, or work
[Guest]: like those things agitated these men. Whereas I think that in parts of South India, those,
[Guest]: those are have become norm. So that's one of the reasons and I think there are like
[Guest]: deep histories of patriarchy in parts of North India that probably is part of the South haven't
[Guest]: been subjected to. There is a general kind of turbulence to life in North India for all
[Guest]: kinds of reasons that there isn't in the South. But at the same time, I think, plainly in
[Guest]: terms of, um, you know, aspiration, I think, I've heard the same things from young men
[Guest]: in Kerala and Tamil Nadu about outsize, like, you know, dreams and ambitions and frustrations
[Guest]: with where they find themselves in life. So I don't think that that would have been that
[Amit Varma]: different.
[Amit Varma]: But the responses to it are more modulated.
[Guest]: No, I mean, my last conversation with the 22 year old in Kerala went something the same
[Guest]: way he said that he's, he's like, you know, he can't take this he was going to, the ways
[Guest]: are different in that he was going to Gulf he was he said that he wanted to make a lot
[Guest]: of money and he didn't have enough time. So he was going to just emigrate and Dubai or
[Guest]: Riyadh or something and just like make large amounts of money. Although he was like, reasonably
[Guest]: placed with his dad's like factory in back home, but it just wasn't enough for him. But
[Guest]: at the same time, he was deeply traditional. He had married a woman from his own community
[Guest]: based on his parents choices. And he believed, you know, he wasn't like a liberal when it
[Guest]: came to like women's choices and agency, but, but in terms of like ambition, he just wanted
[Guest]: to, he wanted no compromise.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I have friends who advocate for a united nation of South India, which is distinct
[Amit Varma]: from North India. And I think after reading your book, they'll say, Yeah, we really need
[Amit Varma]: to do that.
[Amit Varma]: The next question is from Mohit, at Mohit Singh R. I presume there are other Mohit Singhs,
[Guest]: so he had to add an R.
[Amit Varma]: How many Mohit Singhs must there be in this world?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, this I completely understand why the R, reformist perhaps, that's what the R stands
[Amit Varma]: for. Anyway, so Mohit at Mohit Singh R asks, how are the aspirations of young married women
[Amit Varma]: changing?
[Guest]: I didn't really speak to that many, but I reporting some of the other stories, I felt
[Guest]: that they, like most of them that I have met want to work and, but find that, you know,
[Guest]: when you find like few opportunities of the kind that they can, they can afford, I mean,
[Guest]: this is like still partly North India, but, you know, there are so many things that, like
[Guest]: one of the things that I found interesting was this whole beauty parlor revolution and
[Guest]: how this was like the safest thing that married women could do, because it did not threaten
[Guest]: their like, you know, husband's power and privilege in the house, because this was like
[Guest]: a feminine job, they could set up something in their own house, so it didn't interfere
[Guest]: with, you know, homely, wifely duties. And, you know, you could, and yet, you know, you
[Guest]: could, this is the skill that is like, actually taught so widely, and you can easily like
[Guest]: sign up for a couple of months course that it doesn't really, it's affordable and no
[Guest]: one minds. And I wanted, this is like this whole beauty parlor training revolution, something
[Guest]: that I started researching, but dropped after some point, but I want to return to and I
[Amit Varma]: guess I'll have more answers by that time.
[Amit Varma]: So your next book can be on beauty parlors.
[Guest]: No, my next book is a love story.
[Guest]: It's a love story.
[Guest]: Not set in a beauty parlor.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, God, you've broken my heart. Okay. The next question, and it's a good question. It's
[Amit Varma]: by Stupidus Suburbanum, at Rajat Guru Raj, and he asks, I noticed in the book, even though
[Amit Varma]: there are terrific descriptions of young people and their lives and struggles, there is less
[Amit Varma]: in terms of a framework or a theory of understanding the choices that the dreamers are making.
[Amit Varma]: So the question is, what is a way of understanding this?
[Guest]: I really don't like frameworks. If I wanted to deal with frameworks, I would have become
[Guest]: an academic. I don't want to be mean or rude, but I didn't write this book to explain things.
[Guest]: It was just stories that attract me. And it just happened that like, you know, I was attracted
[Guest]: to some of these like, stories of young Indians, because they happen to be interesting and,
[Guest]: and dramatic. And sure, I cared about, I cared about what adds up towards the end or what
[Guest]: what becomes of them or what becomes of their future in this country and the world. But
[Guest]: these are stories and you should make of them what you like. We know enough about where
[Guest]: India is at to, to make sense of them that I don't have to, you know, put a paragraph
[Guest]: after each scene. But at the same time, I feel like there are so many books that at
[Guest]: this point, if you wanted to know about the white, like majoritarianism in US, you could
[Guest]: find and I wish that more people wrote books about this. I mean, books of stories, books
[Guest]: of ideas, books of frameworks around the around the topic. And it's just, I'm just like stuck
[Guest]: in this position, because I'm the only one who's written a book of this kind. And so
[Guest]: many people ask me for what context or broader framework or solutions based setup through
[Guest]: which to see this and I'm not your person.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, I have to endorse that and say that one of the things I really enjoyed about
[Amit Varma]: the book, and I found tremendously impressive was that it's great reportage with absolutely
[Amit Varma]: no pontificating, you're not coming up with your own theories and why things are the way
[Amit Varma]: they are. You're just, and I completely buy that point that there is space for those kind
[Amit Varma]: of books to be written also.
[Amit Varma]: I would have loved to read one before I started reporting this or while I sought answers.
[Amit Varma]: We should put the onus on Stupidus Subramanian at Rajat Guru Raj to write those books.
[Guest]: My next book will have absolutely not a line of context or explanation. And we shall see.
[Guest]: What do you mean by that?
[Guest]: It's just a story. Just there's just a beginning, middle end and there is like, I don't, you
[Guest]: may not even know where it's set. So yeah, and I think storytellers are more important
[Amit Varma]: than framework setters, because we need the stories first and also framework setters mostly
[Amit Varma]: talk through their ass. The next question will be edited out. No, no, of course not.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, said the famous framework setter himself. By the way, I have a framework for this as
[Amit Varma]: well, right? Which everyone knows. Okay, so the next question is from Digambar Rana at
[Amit Varma]: Digambar Rana 07. Please talk about consumerism, merits and demerits of it. Not sure what he
[Amit Varma]: means by the question. But can I find a way?
[Guest]: Can you please answer this for me? Because I don't I'm not qualified.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not sure what the question means if the person has read the book. But I suppose one
[Amit Varma]: way of rephrasing it could be that given that these people are living on the internet and
[Amit Varma]: they're exposed to so much American culture and Kylie Jenner or whatever. Is there also
[Amit Varma]: sort of a growing materialism, for example, in the case of the person you the girl you
[Amit Varma]: mentioned who buys knockoffs of dresses by Katy Perry or whoever? And is that in much
[Amit Varma]: the same way as the knowledge of Englishes? Is that a part of that whole recipe of aspiration?
[Guest]: Yes, it's clear to me now. And yes, I was surprised that three people who I spoke to
[Guest]: who didn't know each other and were in different parts of India said the same thing to me when
[Guest]: I asked them or I didn't ask them about, you know, what their what their goals were in
[Guest]: life. And they said various things, but one was common to each. And it was an Audi car.
[Guest]: And I thought how does that brand become so central to their imagination of the good life?
[Guest]: But it has. And I'll never understand because I'm not their age. I don't like, I don't know
[Guest]: what what they like, consume on a daily basis for them to like think that Audi is like they
[Guest]: want an Audi. Yes, they want an Audi car. I mean, they said various things farmhouses
[Guest]: and like, you know, people should travel the world that that sort of stuff, or like a company
[Guest]: that's worth this million, this many millions of that many millions, but Audi just like
[Amit Varma]: that constant.
[Amit Varma]: This is interesting because my mind flashes back to the Satyajit Ray film Pratidwandi.
[Amit Varma]: Have you seen it? So it's a it's a film made in the late 60s as part of the Calcutta trilogy.
[Amit Varma]: It's about an angry young man who's searching for a job, right? Angry young man searching
[Amit Varma]: for a job sounds familiar. Yes. And during the film, when he's at his height of frustration,
[Amit Varma]: he sees a guy in a Mercedes on the road, kind of knock someone over or a driver, and the
[Amit Varma]: crowd goes wild. And I think they start stoning the Mercedes or something. And he sees the
[Amit Varma]: logo, there's a close up of the logo, if I remember correctly, and he starts running
[Amit Varma]: it as well. And it becomes a symbol of sort of aspiration and oppression at the same time.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that the marketing people at Mercedes need to think strongly about how they've lost
[Guest]: out to Audi in the intervening four decades.
[Guest]: And then a friend of mine then told me about a man who's who's called Audi by his parents.
[Guest]: So okay, that's that's so that he can aspire to that sort of life goals.
[Amit Varma]: Right. So if you were to have kids, what would you name them?
[Amit Varma]: I think having kids is immoral.
[Amit Varma]: I agree with you. Strange. Where have I heard that before? Okay. Yeah. Okay. The next one
[Amit Varma]: is from Ishan at Ishan sir of 179. Quote, I simply loved her book, The Dreamers. However,
[Amit Varma]: most of the stories in it are of North Indian people. Could she also regale us with a few
[Amit Varma]: from the South Northeast? We've already answered that. Also, he says, what measures according
[Amit Varma]: to her are necessary for an increase in women labor participation rate? I'm sorry, in women
[Amit Varma]: labor participation rate. I mean, even in the first part of your book, you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: about how as more women are entering the workforce, more women are dropping out. There's actually
[Guest]: been a decline in the female. So Ishan asked what measures are necessary? But I'd also
[Amit Varma]: say why do you think it's happening since we're on that?
[Guest]: I mean, a lot of women just quote marriage as as a reason a lot of like, I think the
[Guest]: patriarchy has a huge role to play because I think for men, it's
[Amit Varma]: But why is it declining? I mean, the patriarchy has always been there.
[Guest]: No, but I think the you know, if the one of the first things that a man like does after
[Guest]: he has a job is to ask his wife to stop working. And I think that's, that's what's happening.
[Guest]: In terms of measures, I think several, we don't realize the extent to which women have
[Guest]: to think about such factors as safety at workplace or mobility to workplace or, you know, street
[Guest]: lights and like equal wages. And so there are like so many, you know, I mean, challenges
[Guest]: to be met on part of employers, but also governments. If you want to reverse that trend. These are
[Guest]: just there's just a few like, anecdotally, these are just what women told me.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, my guest in the last episode, Shruti Rajgopalan wrote about this recently for Mint.
[Amit Varma]: So you can Google her piece on that. And also, Devika Kher, who works at the Takshashila
[Amit Varma]: Institution did a piece for the magazine I edit Pragati at ThinkPragati.com on what can
[Amit Varma]: be done about this and why it's rising. So you can check those out. And my final question,
[Amit Varma]: that is my final listener question. I have a final question for you, which is separate.
[Amit Varma]: My final listener question is from my friend Gautam John, who asked me to ask you on WhatsApp.
[Amit Varma]: He really loved your book. He thought it was very insightful and interesting. And the question
[Amit Varma]: is, how can we engage young men and boys towards gender equitable outcomes?
[Guest]: Some people are already trying I have been. I mean, after the book came out, I have met
[Guest]: people who have, you know, put together initiatives that begin that begin with talking to boys
[Guest]: while while they're in school. And that's that I thought that was one of the ways I
[Amit Varma]: mean, if you can really begin there, then in school. Yes. Yes. All right. Awesome. So
[Amit Varma]: I'll end with the one question I was saving for last, which is a standard question I asked
[Amit Varma]: to all my guests on whatever subject they're talking about, which is what makes you hopeful
[Amit Varma]: and what makes you despair about the future of young India?
[Guest]: What makes me despair is what I will describe first, which is that the most young people
[Guest]: that I meet and I all I do is like meet young people because every newsworthy story has
[Guest]: at its center young people that, you know, I mean, it is very easy for them to to say
[Guest]: that, you know, the country's future is is over and their future is over. And the like
[Guest]: only solutions to either resort to violence or, you know, to start their own multimillion
[Guest]: company or or I don't know, I mean, go the way of scams or whatever. But what makes me
[Guest]: hopeful is that for I mean, when I was reporting this book, for example, it took me two years.
[Guest]: I met so many people who when I first met them seemed just like just like any other.
[Guest]: So I met some of the men who were like young, who were male, who were North Indian, who
[Guest]: were who did grow up in very traditional backgrounds. And yet they had decided that they weren't
[Guest]: happy with some of the things that they were being told that, you know, in whatever small
[Guest]: ways, whether in whether in terms of like expressing their voice in college politics
[Guest]: or or taking a stand for women in their families or, you know, I mean, trying to remain hopeful
[Guest]: about work, you know, in a place where like several of their friends will just sign up
[Guest]: for call center scams. They were like, you know, I'm going to give this a try. This may
[Guest]: work. This may not work, but they they cared about they had some sense of right and wrong
[Guest]: that they had personally individually framed and they were sticking to that.
[Amit Varma]: And on that hopeful note, thank you so much for coming on the show. I learned a lot from
[Guest]: you today. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do head on over to Amazon or your nearest
[Amit Varma]: neighborhood bookstore if there still is one and buy her book Dreamers, highly recommended
[Amit Varma]: by me. I learned a lot about young India through that book. Also, you can follow her on Instagram
[Amit Varma]: and Twitter at Snigdha Poonam. You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. And you
[Amit Varma]: can browse past episodes of the seen in the unseen at seen unseen dot i n. Thank you for
[Unknown]: listening.
[Unknown]: Did I just catch you on your way to work? Or did you end up pulling an all nighter?
[Unknown]: Let me guess. You have a packed schedule for the day of the week and probably the month
[Unknown]: and the year. That's a lot for your mind to handle, don't you think? This buzzing chaos
[Unknown]: also brings tons of negative thoughts. Am I right? Try spinning that bottle in a positive
[Unknown]: direction with me, Chetna, on the Positively Unlimited podcast every Monday on IBM podcast.
[Unknown]: It's time to change your life one alphabet at a time.
[Unknown]: Give me a word, or any line. Anything. What did you say? Topi? Okay. Mohan Joshi hated
[Unknown]: wearing topis. He felt suffocated in them. Topi pehente hi usse school ki yaad aati thi.
[Unknown]: Well, of course, he had no choice but to wear a topi. But jis din pass out hua, usse din
[Unknown]: usne apne topi ka bonfire bana diya. And since then, he'd never worn a cap or a hat. Na
[Unknown]: kadakti dhoop mein, and not even to bacho from the thandi. But from Monday, 26th February,
[Unknown]: Mohan Joshi had to wear a topi all the time. Why? Because if he didn't, everyone around
[Unknown]: him knew exactly wo kya soch raha tha. They knew that he was wondering how the girl in
[Unknown]: the yellow churidar would look bina kapde ke. They knew when he was calling the boss
[Unknown]: a sadela tomato. They knew everything. Par yeh sab hua kaise? Are bhai, yeh hi toh story
[Unknown]: hai. Aur yeh story aap hi ne mujhe diya, by giving me the starting word. Yeh hi toh hai,
[Unknown]: The Crocs Tales. Words aapke, kahaani aapke liye. Catch the stories on Monday and Thursday
[Unknown]: on the IBM website, app, and anywhere you get your podcasts from. See you soon.